
Organoids derived from induced pluripotent stem cells reproduce key structural and functional features of tissues, providing relevant systems for studying development, disease, and pharmacological response under controlled conditions. These 3D cellular models have been established for multiple body organs, enabling experimental access to complex microenvironmental tissue-like processes that were previously confined to in vivo conditions. Cell culture monitoring is a crucial step in the process as variability is intrinsic to organoid formation processes. Multiple evaluation methods rely on destructive or resource-intensive assays, including techniques such as immunohistochemistry and single-cell RNA sequencing, precluding longitudinal analyses of the same specimen \citep{castiglione2025, handcock2025, ikeda2024, jain2025}. Notably, expert evaluation stands as a method to qualify organoids with proper development \citep{boerstler2025}. As an alternative, non-invasive imaging methods, including light-sheet or Raman microscopy and magnetic resonance imaging, have been applied. These methods can capture structural information, yet their complexity and costs limit scalability \citep{bruno2025, deininger2023, lalone2023}. As a result, pipelines to individually monitor organoids, in a non-destructive, longitudinal way, to address culture variability and quality are lacking.

Human cerebral organoids can mimic early neurodevelopmental events, with the formation of neurogenic regions and cortical layers, having contributed to the study of disorders such as microcephaly, virus infection and epilepsy \citep{garcez2016, lancaster2013, samarasinghe2021, trujillo2019, velasco2019}. The recapitulation of the brain's complex cellular diversity, high metabolic demand, and prolonged developmental trajectory make cerebral organoids powerful systems. Yet, cerebral organoid cultures have intrinsic heterogeneity, requiring continuous batch monitoring for quality control.

Recent developments in label-free imaging have begun to address this challenge by enabling non-destructive, real-time visualization of organoid morphology \citep{boerstler2025, jain2025, kok2025, park2023}. Bright-field and phase-contrast modalities permit tracking of size, shape, and structural organization, offering a basis for quantitative phenotyping and the integration of machine learning for segmentation of bright-field images allows for high-throughput extraction of meaningful morphometric information \citep{demchenko2025, qin2025, streller2025}.

Those monitoring approaches would highly benefit from measuring metabolites in the media, since metabolic profiling can provide functional readouts of the biochemical fluxes that sustain function and development. In the human brain, the balance between glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation orchestrates key developmental processes, including radial glia maturation, neuronal differentiation, and the emergence of network activity \citep{chong2022, rangaraju2014}. In vitro, these programs are further shaped by nutrient availability, oxygen diffusion, and other microenvironmental constraints, making extracellular metabolites sensitive indicators of tissue state and developmental potential. Integrating metabolic and morphological measurements from individual organoids over time may offer a quantitative and non-invasive route to assess developmental health, capture early metabolic transitions, and link functional maturation to structural outcomes.

Here we propose a pipeline integrating individualized, non-destructive imaging to extract morphometric features with metabolic profiles from conditioned media during cerebral organoid formation. Quality labels were determined by expert ratings including our team and international experienced researchers from other laboratories. These labels served as a connection between early structural and biochemical features to developmental outcomes, looping in machine learning algorithms to integrate measurements and predict quality. Through this combined human--AI analysis, we show that organoid bioenergetics closely mirror developmental trajectory and final quality. Distinct morpho-metabolic signatures consistently separate high- and low-quality organoids, enabling early, non-invasive identification of organoid health. Together, these findings uncover a quantitative and predictive coupling between metabolism and morphogenesis, establishing a robust foundation for reproducible, standardized, and ultimately automated quality control in organoid-based systems.

\subsection{A pipeline for multimodal monitoring and quality assessment}

A protocol for individualized culture of unguided brain organoids was developed based on our previously published protocol \citep{fernandezbessone2022, gotosilva2019, karmirian2023, ncosta2024, ornelas2022} to enable continuous monitoring of single organoids from day 3 through day 30. This timeframe encompasses key phases of the cultivation protocol: embryoid body formation (EB), neuroinduction (NI), early differentiation (ED), and late differentiation (LD).



Using this scalable system, three independent batches of organoids were monitored individually, totaling 291 organoids. On days 3, 6, 8, 10, 13, 15, 17, 21, 24, 28 and 30 of the protocol (Fig.~1A), each organoid was photographed on a bright-field inverted microscope and conditioned media were collected for follow-up metabolite analysis. This approach provided a standardized and reproducible framework for assessing individual organoid development over time.

To enable unbiased quantification of these morphological dynamics, we extracted morphometric parameters from bright-field images, building an automated analytical framework that bridges imaging data with quantitative shape metrics. We employed an artificial intelligence (AI)-based model capable of identifying and segmenting organoids across this diverse range of imaging conditions. This model was trained using a curated dataset of manually annotated images encompassing multiple experimental batches, microscopes, and acquisition settings, ensuring generalizability and robustness (Supp.\ Table S1). This automation eliminated observer bias and enabled consistent feature extraction across $>$\,2500 images.
